Flashing Libreboot to Thinkpad R400 Internally
==============================================

> Be careful! No warranties!

The Setup
---------

Thinkpad R400 that was previously externally flashed with Libreboot

Debian 12

Process
-------

This guide is supposed to be followed from the top, getting Libreboot, build
dependencies, and flashrom before putting it all together in the end.

Everything was that you see in this guide was done on a R400 (even the
documentation!)

Good Luck!

### Booting

*Remember:* You have to specify `iomem=relaxed` in the boot options!

You can do this before Linux boots by editing the boot options in GRUB.

In GRUB you can do this by starting your computer, when GRUB shows up,
select the boot option that you normally use, press `E` on the keyboard to
edit the boot option. Navigate to the row that has `linux=vmlinuz` somewhere
in it and add `iomem=relaxed` after that.

### Getting Libreboot

Download all GPG Keys from https://libreboot.org/download.html and add them
to gpg using `gpg --import [KEYPATH]`

Download Libreboot (`20231106`) from a mirror from
https://libreboot.org/download.html

The path structure on the mirror should be
`release/testing/20231106/libreboot-20231106_src.tar.xz`

Download the `libreboot-20231106_src.tar.xz.sha512` and
`libreboot-20231106_src.tar.xz.sig` too.

> The libreboot download is quite large!

Verify download using
```bash
sha512sum -c libreboot-20231106_src.tar.xz.sha512
gpg --verify libreboot-20231106_src.tar.xz.sig
```

> Yes, the key that was used to sign the relase may be expired. That's fine.

Extract using
```bash
tar xfv libreboot-20231106_src.tar.xz
```

### Dependencies
It seems like the Libreboot project want to make it easy to get started with
Libreboot. Getting the dependencies to build everything can be done using
the following from the source directory that you extracted previously.
```bash
./build dependencies [distro]
```
> I put `debian` for the distro (remove the brackets) since I'm on Debian

### flashrom

Libreboot seem to recommend not to use a too recent version of flashrom...
but they include a very recent one in the libreboot download...

Your alternatives:
* Acquire older flashrom and compile it yourself
* Acquire flashrom from your distribution
* Use the included flashrom and compile it yourself

#### Acquiring older flashrom

> flashrom source: https://download.flashrom.org/releases/

I used 1.2.1 (since 1.2 didn't compile for me)

From the flashrom source directory, run `make`

You can run `sudo make install` to get it in your `/usr/local/bin`. I didn't, I
just used the whole path to the compiled `flashrom` binary.

#### Acquire flashrom from your distribution

I used Debian (if you use anything else the instructions below may not work)

> Be aware that the packages provided by your distribution may be more
> recent than what is recommended! If you can't run `flashrom -p internal`
> then you know it is too new.

```bash
sudo apt install flashrom
```

#### Use the included flashrom

> Just don't, you probably wont have access to `flashrom -p internal`.

From the Libreboot source directory, go into the `src/flashrom` directory,
run `make` (and optionally `sudo make install`).

### Flash Size

Figure out your flash size by using flashrom. Do the following
```bash
sudo flashrom -p internal
```

Output (truncated):
```
flashrom v1.2.1 on Linux 6.1.0-17-amd64 (x86_64)
flashrom is free software, get the source code at https://flashrom.org

Using clock_gettime for delay loops (clk_id: 1, resolution: 1ns).
coreboot table found at 0x7f76d000.
Found chipset "Intel ICH9M-E".
Enabling flash write... OK.
Error accessing MX25U51245G, 0x4000000 bytes at 0x00000000fc000000
/dev/mem mmap failed: Resource temporarily unavailable
Could not map flash chip MX25U51245G at 0x00000000fc000000.
--SNIP--
Error accessing S25FL512S, 0x4000000 bytes at 0x00000000fc000000
/dev/mem mmap failed: Resource temporarily unavailable
Could not map flash chip S25FL512S at 0x00000000fc000000.
Found Winbond flash chip "W25X64" (8192 kB, SPI) mapped at physical address 0x00000000ff800000.
No operations were specified.
```

### Building Libreboot

Just run the following from the Libreboot directory (adjust `8mb` to
something else if you have more or less flash rom)
```bash
./build roms r400_8mb
```
> This will take time the first time you compile it!

### Backing up your old ROM

Here we backup the same thing three times because we're paranoid.

Run
```bash
sudo flashrom -p internal -r my_r400_backup1.rom
sudo flashrom -p internal -r my_r400_backup2.rom
sudo flashrom -p internal -r my_r400_backup3.rom
sha512sum my_r400_backup*.rom
```

Make sure that the output from `sha512sum` is identical for the backups.

### Flashing Libreboot

With your old ROM backed up you can flash Libreboot.

With Libreboot compiled and ready for your R400 you can go into the
`bin/r400_8mb` directory and see all the options that you have (using `ls`).

Pick one like
`seabios_withgrub_r400_8mb_libgfxinit_corebootfb_usqwerty_noblobs.rom`

Flash it using
```bash
sudo flashrom -p internal -w [NAME OF YOUR ROM HERE]
```
> Replace `[NAME OF YOUR ROM HERE]` with the filename to the ROM picked.

### Verifying the flash

Just like when we backed up your old ROM we can download the newly flashed
one and check that it matches the ROM that we wrote.
```bash
sudo flashrom -p internal -r my_flashed_r400.rom
sha512sum my_flashed_r400.rom [PATH TO YOUR ROM HERE]
```

Make sure that the output from `sha512sum` is identical.

You have now successfully flashed your R400 with Libreboot! Congratulations!

What if something goes wrong?
-----------------------------

### Recovering from Backup
If you made backups you can try flashing these back to the ROM using
```bash
sudo flashrom -p internal -w my_r400_backup1.rom
```

### flashrom just didn't want to write

Instead of `-p internal` you can test `-p internal:boardmismatch=force`

If that doesn't work you can test
`-p internal:boardmismatch=force,laptop=force_I_want_a_brick`

### Everything broke!

Flash externally (not covered in this guide) or call a friend that can help!
